Imagine lying in your bed,
and suddenly becoming paralyzed,
and transported to a time 5,000 years into the future,
where you're experiencing life through the eyes
and body of a stranger.
Well, this is what happened
to anthropologist Hank Wesselman,
a scientist who spent 25 years
working in the fossil beds,
at the East Africa's Rift Valley,
alongside the Leakey family.
These visionary experiences
put him on an entirely new path,
in his investigations into the evolution
of human beings and our consciousness,
both from the past,
and into the future.
Your background is that as an anthropologist,
and paleontologist.
But not an ordinary story, academically or otherwise,
because you began having some experiences
that were really quite extraordinary,
that started taking you and your work
in an entirely new direction, or a parallel direction.
And this is chronicled in your book "Spiritwalker,"
which I read several years ago.
Fantastic book, very engaging.
What happened that began this path of your work?
Well, in those days, back in the early 70's,
I got into anthropology,
and for the past 30 years or so,
I've been a member of a team of scientists,
investigating those eroded landscapes
of the Great Rift Valley in Eastern Africa,
looking for the evidence,
for the earliest ancestors of humanity.
We've essentially been looking for the missing link,
that Charles Darwin said we would eventually find.
And so, in the early 70's, I was drawn into this work,
as a graduate student out of UC Berkeley.
And, I found myself rubbing elbows with
individuals like Louis and Mary Leakey,
and their son Richard,
Don Johanson, the man who would later find Lucy.
And I was operating at the highest levels of science.
But it was out there in the deserts of Southwestern Ethiopia
that I began to have what could broadly be called
"visionary experiences".
Now in those days, I had no idea
what visionary experiences were.
You know, I wasn't one of those individuals
who studied for years
at the knees of the wisdom masters,
practicing meditation and yoga,
hoping for transcendent experiences.
You know, this was not my path.
I worshiped solely at the altar of science.
And so, when these early epiphanies occurred for me,
out in the bush in Africa,
I took note of them.
I thought about them a great deal.
And I kind of made cryptic notes in my journals.
This isn't the sort of thing you share with your colleagues
in the field of Paleo-Anthropology, alright?
10 years later, in Berkeley,
I had finished my doctoral dissertation.
I'd gotten my PhD.
I was converting my dissertation into a monograph,
which was published in Switzerland.
And one morning at dawn,
on the heels of a joyous marital encounter...
Okay, I know what you're talking about.
Okay?
At four o'clock in the morning,
I was precipitated into a visionary state of consciousness,
which was quite frightening initially, because,
suddenly, my physical body was invaded,
by feelings of power or force, or pressure.
It was like I was inside an invisible fist,
which was squeezing.
And I discovered my body was completely paralyzed.
I couldn't even breathe effectively.
I remember gulping for air.
And as my eyelids fluttered, my room disappeared.
I'm lying in bed next to my wife, while this is going on.
And I find myself in this dark forest at night.
Black on black.
I could see trees against the blackness of the night.
And I could smell this very sweet scent,
that suggested flowering trees.
And I'm hear-- you know,
I can feel these enormous feelings of power.
I mean, it's-- you know, the word ecstasy doesn't come close
to what this really felt like.
But my curiosity clicked on.
I discovered my intentions, my thoughts,
were enough to move me here and there.
If I wanted to see something,
I would drift in that direction, and I would see it.
It was in this state,
that I was brought face to face
with what indigenous tribal people would call
a "spirit".
Now, nothing in my training at UC Berkeley
prepared me for this experience.
(Regina chuckles)
Alright?
I was face to face with something truly formidable.
It looked like a gigantic shadow.
I was aware of Jung's concept of the shadow.
This was not a projection of myself,
I knew quite clearly.
This was a large, tall silhouette,
that looked somewhat like a keyhole,
with a little head at the top, shoulders,
and then went all the way down to the ground.
I was face to face with this thing,
and the thought occurred to me that this,
whatever it was,
could be the source of the sensations
that I was experiencing.
With that thought, the (mumbles) was turned up, alright?
And I found myself lifted off the ground,
and gently rotated in space,
with lightning flashing out of my fingertips
and off my shoulders.
It coulda been very frightening,
if I wasn't so curious.
I mean, this is what has been my cross to bear.
This is what got me in to science, my curiosity.
I'm a scholar.
This episode came to an end.
And it peaked my curiosity beyond anything else
I'd experienced in my life.
I mean, when you've had the direct experience of spirit,
everything is different.
I had another one, a week later.
And then a real beauty, about six months later,
just to make sure I was paying attention.
On which, I was taken on a cosmic tour of the universe.
I was taken places and shown things,
which were clearly not here.
They're clearly, if we could use this term,
extraterrestrial.
I was shown extraterrestrial life forms.
Extraterrestrial landscapes.
And at the end of this experience,
I was brought back to my body.
My body wasn't going anywhere.
This was my mind, which was flying.
I was brought back to my body,
in bed, in Berkeley,
on a foggy Berkeley morning.
And, nothing was ever quite the same,
for me, again, after that.
Now, having had these experiences,
I wanted more.
And I wanted it from direct experience.
I didn't wanna read about it.
I wanted to have it.
But I couldn't seem to turn it on again.
Now I took a lot of workshops in Shamanism.
I knew about Shamans, by this time.
As an anthropologist, I would know that.
Now, in the Western world,
when we use the word "shaman," most of us tend to conjure up
an image of a masked and tribal person,
dancing around the fire in the dark,
involved in some mysterious ritual,
accompanied by drum beats.
And that's not a bad description.
But the mask, the costume, the ritual,
these are all cultural things.
And inside that cultural shell,
there's an individual, a man or a woman,
who has a set of very real skills.
Now, all true Shamans
learn or discover that they have this ability
to achieve these expanded awareness states.
We could call then trance states.
But I don't tend to use the word trance, because,
trance implies that you're unconscious.
And this is quite the reverse.
In these states, I was super-conscious.
I was super-conscious.
My consciousness expanded,
beyond my wildest imaginings.
Well, this is what typifies the Shaman.
The Shaman achieves these expanded awareness states.
And it's in these states,
that they disassociate their conscious awareness,
away from their physical body.
And literally enter into, or journey into,
an alternate reality,
which indigenous people call the "Spirit World".
They call it the Spirit World,
because they encounter spirits there.
The spirits of nature,
the spirits of animals,
the spirits of plants,
the spirits of higher divine beings,
the angelic forces,
those compassionate beings who are poised,
just beyond the edges of the reality,
that we all take so much for granted.
Poised to help us in various ways.
In other words, these are
ancient human archetypal experiences,
which the rich diversity of cave and rock art reveals
has been going on for at least 40 to 50,000 years.
Now, I sensed that I was being drawn in this direction,
so I began to take workshops in Shamanism,
and I learned that the Shaman is really a public servant.
The Shaman is able to do various things,
on behalf of others.
Restore power to those who've lost it.
They're able to access information through divination,
from these spirits.
Information of meaning to their client,
who comes to them for help.
They're able to do healing work on various levels,
physical, spiritual, mental, emotional and energetic.
And initially, of course,
as we get drawn into this unusual practice,
we access this experience on behalf of ourselves.
But we find ourselves, ultimately,
drawn in the direction of being of service for others.
And the Spiritwalker story,
is really the story of how I was drawn into this world.
Now, when I lived in Hawaii, right?
This is really the core of that book.
One morning, at four o'clock in the morning,
two, three years later,
the feelings of paralysis appeared in my body once again.
Now, I was waiting for this.
I'd been trying to turn this on again,
for almost three years.
I was waiting for this.
And when it happened, there was a side of me that said,
"Yes!"
You know, that's how I felt.
Now, my conscious awareness, once again,
was drawn out of my physical body,
and I found myself traveling
through this inter-dimensional latticework.
It looked like a matrix, or a grid, or a spider web perhaps.
Yes.
And it was made of light.
And I seemed to be traveling along a line of light,
towards one of these curious light objects,
that looked very much like the new moon,
in the sense that it was a crescent,
that began to open.
And as the crescent opened,
I began to head right for it, and--
(snaps fingers)
I went through, and I blacked out.
Mmhmm.
Now, when my conscious awareness clicked on again,
I was in somebody else's body.
Whose, and where, and when?
Well, this is where it gets really tricky.
Yes.
I wasn't prepared for this experience.
And my first impulse was shock.
Now, my limited experience with meditation--
I was a very poor Zen student, for about 25 years.
I say, poor Zen student, because I never really developed
the discipline to go sit in the Zen dome.
My business has been out there in the world at large.
But my experience with meditation allowed me
to become completely passive,
and to sit quietly within,
and look out through this man's eyes,
at a world I had never seen before.
I discovered almost immediately,
that I could access his thoughts, his emotions,
his feelings, his memories, his judgments.
I began to track his thought train,
as though I cou-- or my own.
Now, he was unaware of the fact that I was there.
At that time.
Mmhmm.
In the beginning.
He was unaware of me.
This man is a man of Hawaiian ancestry.
But he's not living in Hawaii.
He's living somewhere on the coast of Western North America,
in a slice of time which is different from this one.
If I've got this right, and I believe I do,
this man lives in a time 247 generations
after the collapse of Western civilization.
After the collapse of the world
that we all take so much for granted.
Now, if you multiply this out,
this comes out to, roughly, 5,000 years.
If I've got this right,
I was having a look at the future,
5,000 years into the future,
through the eyes and soul of a man,
who seemed very familiar to me, in the beginning.
Now, in this first episode, I was merged with this man,
for 18 hours of his time,
as he was leaving his community,
and engaging on a voyage of geographic investigation,
into the interior of the lost continent of America.
Now, when I talk about this with big conferences,
there's still a side of Hank Wesselman, the scientist,
that steps back and says,
"Hank, did you really say that to these people?
"Time traveling, involved with spirit possession.
"Possessing another man's body,
"looking out through his eyes and soul at another world?"
I'll bet the quantum physicists are saying,
"Entirely possible, not just possible, probable,
"that time is not linear, and to be able to experience
"an existence in the past or the future or the present
"is all one," right?
Well I didn't know very much about the quantum world then.
Yeah.
I didn't know about the zero point field, for example.
Yes, exactly.
And that's the field I was accessing, to find this man.
Mmhmm.
Now, Spiritwalker is the story
of how I had 12 of these episodes over a four year period,
while living on my farm in Hawaii.
So, in a sense, the whole story takes place in Hawaii.
But it also takes place in the future,
as this man engages this-- in this extraordinary journey,
across the wilderness of North America,
and finds the descendants of our once great civilization.
He finds them.
Now, I wouldn't dream of spoiling this
interesting story for your readers because this is all
very carefully laid-out in this book Spiritwalker,
in which I try to weave together
these numinous epiphanies,
with my ordinary life,
looking for patterns of reason and causality.
Mmhmm.
See, the scientist is always trying to figure it out.
And so, that book is really my personal journal,
of my Shamanic initiation crisis.
It's a fabulous book, mmhmm.
The second book in the trilogy, Medicinemaker,
is about how I became a Medicine Man.
It's really about my recovery.
And the third book, Visionseeker, is about training.
It's about my training in the Shamanic tradition,
and Nainoa's training in the Kahuna tradition.
And these books contain a lot of secret knowledge,
of the Kahuna mystics of Polynesia,
which is not generally published.
Now, this brings us to a very sticky point.
I was aware, in publishing these books,
that I was trespassing.
Trespassing on ancient and
closed tradition? Or what?
I was sharing knowledge from the Kahuna tradition--
Yes, right.
which has never been--
much of which has never been published.
Right, yes.
And I knew that sooner or later,
the Kahunas were gonna come to look me over,
to see if I was real.
And?
Well, Spiritwalker came out in 1995,
and it made a huge splash.
In fact, it's been published in 13 languages abroad.
In 1996, I was invited to speak at an institute in Hawaii,
the New Millennium Institute,
which, at that time, was based in a Frank Lloyd Wright house
on the big island of Hawaii, up in Waimea,
where the Parker Ranch is headquartered.
They heard about me,
and they invited me to come and speak.
So I checked it out, you know.
I usually check things like this out,
with my spirits, who wander around with me now,
advising me as teachers and helpers.
So I just kind of turned my attention in their direction,
and they gave it the thumbs up.
So my wife Jill and I left our kids
at the Kanoa Beach Hotel.
You know, you can do that in Hawaii.
I just alerted the staff that the children were
going to be at the hotel for the day, and,
don't give them too much in the way of dessert.
And they, the whole hotel, took care of our kids.
Mmhmm.
So we went up to Waimea.
And as we arrived, it started to rain torrentially.
Now, in Hawaii, this is a very propitious sign,
because it's known,
that when the Gods come,
they always come with clouds and rain.
And on this occasion, the clouds came down to the earth,
and rained torrentially, for about 15 minutes,
(snaps fingers)
then stopped.
Good sign.
(mumbles)
On this occasion, about 15 people
came to hear what I had to say.
And I was talking about the transformational community.
I was talking about this very interesting slice
of Western society,
who are involved in the kinds of work
that we're doing together today, alright?
People who are interested in what we're exploring.
Just before I began my talk, the door opened.
And in comes this big Hawaiian man.
Now this man's about a head taller than me.
He's got a big ponytail down his back,
a great big white beard down his front,
a big walking stick in front of him.
And he had four more Hawaiian men with him,
all of whom had beards and ponytails,
and I'm going, "uhhhhhhhhh."
(laughs) You'd better be for real.
I knew that the time had come.
Mmhmm.
That they had come to look me over.
Now these guys also had their wives with them.
This was a good sign.
This meant I wasn't gonna be turned into a pillar of salt,
at least not that day.
So, this man was introduced to me.
He has since passed over,
so I can use his name.
His name was Hale Makua.
Hale Kaohalani Makua.
Seven generation direct descendant of King Kamehameha Nui,
on his mother's side.
And seven generation direct descendant
of High Chief Kīwalaʻō,
who was Kamehameha's cousin,
who Kamehameha killed,
to become the Moi, the King.
In other words, this man Makua,
had an exceptional genealogy.
Right.
I'd been hearing about this guy for years.
This wasn't just any Kahuna who came to hear
what I had to say.
This was the Big Kahuna.
The big Kahuna. (laughs)
This is a good time to have spirit helpers.
So I breathed a quiet prayer to myself,
asking for support.
Launched into my talk.
And about an hour and a half later,
I came to the end,
and I'm watching Makua all of this time.
He's listening very seriously to what--
everything I'm saying.
When I came to the end of my talk,
I had this feeling that he wanted to say something.
It was an intuitive hit.
And so I asked him, "Makua, I'm having this feeling
"that there's something you would like to say."
Makua, you know, sort of looked down and smiled, and--
Now, this was a man who traveled with 27 generations
of his ancestral spirits in constant attendance upon him.
He kind of leaned over this way,
as though someone was talking in that ear.
Then he kind of leaned over this way,
as though someone were talking in this ear.
And he smiled, and he stood up.
And he looked at me, and he said,
"A friend of mine sent me your book.
"And I read it.
That's it.
Silence--
(Regina laughs)
in the room.
I mean, this was high noon in Polynesia, you know, this wa--
You're waiting for the rest of the story.
Oh, my God, they're waiting for the other shoe to drop.
He looked at me very seriously, and he said,
"I read it again, just to make sure I got it right.
"And then I went down to the ocean.
"I went down to the beach,
"and I took your book, and I put it down on the sand."
This is in Spiritwalker.
"And I called on the ancestors."
He said, "I called on the ancestors,
"and we had a talk about you."
He looked at me seriously, and he said,
"The ancestors asked me what your name is,
"and I told them your name is Wesselman.
"Hank Wesselman."
And he smiled at this point.
Now, I'm gonna say something from a place of sharing,
not from a place of ego.
He looked at me and he said,
"The ancestors told me
"I wasn't pronouncing your name right.
"They told me your name is Vessel-man."
Vesselman, ah.
That you are the vessel--
Yes.
Like the canoe.
And he's looking at me, to see if I'm getting it yet.
And of course, I'm going into shock,
because I'd been expecting him to condemn me.
Right.
I'd been expecting him to say,
"Look, you're not Hawaiian.
"Stop writing about us."
(laughs) You'd been dreading the day
the Kahunas would find you.
Well, you know, there are all these well-intentioned
outsiders who've written books on Huna.
Right.
Now, for starters,
Huna is not the word for the Hawaiian spiritual tradition.
So whenever you read a book on Huna,
it's written by an outsider,
who doesn't know the deep knowledge.
This man is watching me, as all these thoughts
are going through my mind, right?
And he says, "Don't worry.
"We Hawaiians don't write. We talk.
"And we share what we find in our hearts with eachother.
"But in your tradition, it's in your culture to write.
"And so the ancestors have asked me to say to you, today,
"in front of all these people here,
"that everything you wrote in your book is true.
"And we Hawaiians support you.
"Keep spreading the word.
"You're making my job easy."
(Regina laughs softly)
Now this was the beginning of a most unusual friendship.
Makua walked over to me, laughing-- everybody was crying,
because this was such a moving experience.
He walked over to me and said,
"We should have a meeting before you leave the island."
We had our meeting.
He and his partner Nina, me and my wife Jill.
We met right on the edge of the Kilauea crater.
That big active volcano on Mauna Loa's Southeastern side.
We spent a whole day together, getting to know eachother.
And at the end of that day, he gave me a gift.
He gave me a bowl, a Hawaiian wooden bowl.
And he said to me,
"When each one of us comes into the world,
"we came in with a bowl of light.
"This is the light that's the gift from our oversoul,
"our higher self,
"which divided itself, before we came in,
"and sent in a seed of its light."
He said, "That bowl of light nourishes us and sustains us
"as we pass through life.
"But every time we step into the negative polarity,
"every time we injure someone with our thoughts,
"or our words, or our deeds.
"every time we take something that doesn't belong to us,
"every time we achieve success at the expense of
"somebody else's failure,
"it's like you put a stone in your bowl,
"and some of your light goes out."
He said, "Life is long,
"and surely, surely, our bowl of light
"begins to fill up with stones,
"until there's almost no light coming out anymore."
He said, "You know what you do then?"
And of course, my wife and I are hanging on every word.
I said, "What?"
He said, "That's easy."
And he picked up the wooden bowl, and he turned it over,
and he said, "You just dump them--
Dumped out all the rocks. (laughs)
Dumped out all the rocks.
And he laughed.
He said, "But when you reach that point,
"that's when you become a spiritual warrior."
Now, he used this word "warrior" with deliberation,
because Makua was in the Marine Corp,
and he was a warrior, right?
90 tours of duty in Vietnam.
Mmm.
Five wars, starting with Beirut.
He was a warrior.
He said, "When you become a spiritual warrior,
"your path is narrow.
"And it's constrained by three sacred directives."
They call them kapus--
Mmhmm.
in Hawaiian.
Right.
Three sacred kapus.
He said, "The first kapu.
"Love all that you see,
"with humility."
Love what you see.
Get in touch with your aloha,
and extend that aloha to all that you see,
cause that's where you find your humility.
That can only be done through humility.
He said, "I've worked on that one for seven years."
"Number two.
"Live all that you feel, with reverance."
Live what you feel with reverance.
This reverance, this act of respect,
this is where indigenous mind begins.
You see, Western mind,
Western mind begins with dominion.
Control.
Indigenous mind begins with respect.
With reverance.
He said, "I've worked on that one for seven years."
Then finally, "Number three.
"Know all that you possess, with discipline."
Cause this is where you find your self discipline.
If you're gonna walk the spiritual path,
you have to come from a place of self discipline.
Otherwise, nothing works right.
So, he laid these three directives on me.
And you know, I'm thinking, "Wow, this is really something."
This was the beginning of our friendship,
and over an eight year period, until he passed in 2004,
whenever my wife and I went to Hawaii,
we would spend anywhere from a day to
two or three, four days with him and his partner Nina.
And during this time, he shared with me
an enormous amount of knowledge,
from the Kahuna tradition,
none of which has been published, and of course,
I don't know if any of it ever will be.
But in the workshops and seminars,
very often we get into discussions.
So it becomes shared in the oral tradition.
Mmhmm.
Which is the way that it always was.
You know, when we teach at Esalen,
when we teach at Omega,
when we teach at Crossings,
when we teach in Hawaii, you know.
All of these seminar and workshop centers
allow us to come and share what we have to offer.
Now, you wanted to talk about the soul.
Yes, and in the Kahuna tradition,
and in what you have learned,
again, without revealing anything that should be--
should not be passed on,
the Kahuna tradition has particular understanding
of the soul, its parts and its functions.
And so, I wanted you to talk about that a little bit,
if you will.
Well, it was through my experiences,
which are recorded in the Vision--
in the Spiritwalker trilogy,
that I learned that the Hawaiians understand
that we have, not one, but three souls.
I also discovered that the Inuit
believe we have three souls.
Mmhmm.
The Lakota, three souls.
The Cherokee, three souls.
The Orisha tradition of Africa, three souls.
The Shuar of the Amazon, three souls.
Now this is quite interesting.
I have no idea how widely this knowledge was once held,
in the indigenous world, because so much has been lost,
through Christian missionary activity.
But if I were to summarize the way in which
the Kahunas view the three souls,
we could begin with the higher self,
the oversoul.
The immortal, spiritual soul.
Which is who we are there, right?
That soul exists always, eternally, in the upper worlds.
In what Judeo Christians call "Heaven".
And Islamic people call "Paradise".
That aspect of our self resides there.
Mmhmm.
Now before we come into life,
the oversoul divides itself,
and it sends down a seed of its energy.
This is very much like a hologram,
in the sense that that seed contains everything,
which is recorded in the oversoul field.
Interestingly, the vehicle of transfer
to the new embodiment for a new life,
is the breath.
What the Hawaiians call the "Ha".
Mmhmm.
Ha.
Ha, as in, aloha.
Alo means face to face.
Ha is the divine breath of life.
And when I say aloha to you, it means,
"The God in me greets the Goddess in you."
Alright?
Now, the vehicle of transfer, the breath.
When the embodiment is being born from its mother's womb,
and it takes its first breath,
(breathes in deeply)
that seed of light descends and takes up residence.
Mmhmm.
Now, as this seed of light comes into the new being,
for the new life,
it encounters a distinct and separate soul,
which is already in residence.
This is the soul of the body, the body soul,
what Hawaiians call "unihipili".
There are lots of fancy words for these
different aspects of the self.
We'll just use the term body soul.
Now, the body soul find its source
from mom and dad.
Because in the same way that there's a genetic template,
that accompanies the sperm and the egg,
there's also a psychic, spiritual, energetic template,
that accompanies the sperm and the egg.
And that spiritual complex merges at fertilization,
to form a unity.
And its within that body soul,
within that energetic, spiritual component,
that the embryo grows into a fetus which eventually
takes form as the individual
who's ready to be born into life.
Now, this body soul contains all ancestral imprints,
from both the mother's and father's lineages.
This is why we do things which are reminiscent of
this ancestor or that ancestor.
Not just genetically,
but also socially and learned behaviors.
Patterns of behavior--
Patterns of behavior, yes.
Patterns of expression.
Patterns of character.
Right.
Right?
Belief systems.
That's right.
Now, the body soul has very specific functions.
If I were to just list them on my fingers.
Number one, this is where your memory banks are stored.
This is where your memories are.
Number two, it's the source of all of our
emotions and feelings,
which is why Deepak and others call it the emotional body.
Number three.
It's the aspect of ourselves, which perceives the other.
The other world out there,
as well as the other in there.
It's the interface between the self and the other,
the perceiver.
Number four, the entire operation of the physical body,
including its repair and restoration,
is under its direct control.
That means, the inner healer, is in the body soul.
The body soul is programmed to do this.
Number five, all of our habitual and learned behavior
emerges from the body soul,
because the body soul function is memory.
Number six, it's programmed to grow,
to increase and become more.
It's not programmed to repress, deny and contain.
Mmhmm.
Alright? Which is why we get into so much trouble--
Right.
when we repress, deny, or hold negative memories,
negative emotions, negative thoughts within us.
Disease is the result--
It disrupts--
Yes.
the pattern.
The matrix of our energetic field,
which is a precursor to illness.
Right.
Finally, the body soul is very much like
a good servant, a faithful servant, or a good computer.
In fact, your body soul is kind of like
your inner hard drive,
in the sense that it's programmed
with all the evolutionary software,
that this embodiment needs to get through life successfully.
The acquiring of new skills,
the acquiring of new abilities,
learning new things, that's all programmed in
through the body soul.
The body soul is very impressed by anything physical.
Ritual, ceremony.
Basketball games, football games,
this is all impressive to the body soul.
And anything of a sensorial nature, right?
Love making.
Yes.
You see, the body soul is the sender and receiver
of all psychic and Shamanic experiences, which is why
it was on the heels of a joyous marital encounter,
that I began to go into these visionary experiences.
See, sexuality is one of the gateways
to transcendent experiences.
It's probably the most easily accessible one to us,
and one of the most pleasurable.
That's cause the body soul is motivated by pleasure.
See, the oversoul is motivated by creation.
The oversoul is the creator of who and what we are.
It's our personal creator, our God self.
And the body soul is kind of like the servant.
Now, between the body soul and the oversoul seed,
the third soul comes into being in response to life.
This is the mental soul.
What the Hawaiians call "uhane".
The mental soul is what Freud called "ego",
and what Jung called the conscious mind.
In fact, the body-- the mental soul, right?
The body soul is what we call subconscious--
well, unconscious mind.
Mmhmm.
Or the "id" of Freud.
The mental soul is the conscious mind, or the ego.
And the mental soul, again, has very specific functions.
It's our inner director.
Alright?
It's the aspect of our self that thinks,
analyzes, integrates, and makes decisions.
It's the aspect of our self that receives information
from a variety of sources,
through the body soul,
analyzes that information, integrates it,
and makes decisions about it.
So, in essence, we would have there the--
what we would call the conscious mind--
which I find ironic--
the subconscious mind in the body,
and the super-conscious mind--
That's it.
in the spirit.
Even though the conscious mind is probably
the most limited in scope, in a way,
but it is at the helm.
That's it.
Yes.
In many ways, the so-called unconscious or subconscious
is much more conscious than the conscious mind.
Yes.
Cause it's multi-tracking, all the time.
Right.
It's aware of all sorts of things,
that we're not consciously aware of.
Now, the conscious mind is also the source of our volition,
and our intentionality,
which means, it's your inner CEO.
Your inner Chief.
Your inner director.
And the decisions that it makes, in full awareness or not,
are what steer it successfully,
or unsuccessfully, through life.
Cause we're here to learn lessons.
It's all about learning our lessons,
and becoming more than we were.
And yet, at the same time,
it's somewhat of a slave to the subconscious mind.
It's in relationship with the subconscious mind.
Mmhmm.
See, the three souls,
oversoul, body soul and mental soul,
are in relationship.
Yes.
And when those three souls are aligned,
fully expressed, fully aware, fully
disciplined, could we say?
This is the stage, which the Buddha called "enlightenment".
Right.
Because everything becomes possible at that point.
And the symbol of the Buddha,
seated in deep meditation,
fully awakened, fully aware,
is the symbol which the Hawaiians call Kanaloa.
Kanaloa is the God of the ocean.
The God of the deep sea.
And Kanaloa is the great sustainor and progenitor of life.
In fact, in Polynesian mythology,
Kanaloa is one of the star people, who came here,
with his wife Mar-i-u-la,
and found this place to be good,
dove deep into the ocean, and then,
the other princes of heaven went back
and brought all of the other souls here.
It's a very beautiful creation story,
in which we, literally, came as seeds of life,
from across the universe.
And we were brought here by high guardians,
who knew our purpose and our destiny.
And it's interesting because,
in different traditions, the same story is reflected,
just different names.
That's it, you see, and,
in Judeo Christianity, for example, it's agreed,
that God breathes life into form.
And the same word is used for spirit and breath.
Spiritus, in latin, means both "spirit" and "breath".
In Hebrew, ruach, ruach,
is the word for breath and the word for spirit.
Mmhmm.
But you see, in the inner mystical tradition,
it's not some monotheistic creator God
that was invented by the organized priesthoods
of our hierarchical religions.
It's not this monotheistic creator God,
who breathed life into us.
It's our own personal God self.
Yes.
And the oversoul, right, the oversoul,
is-- it serves as the source,
of who and what we are as we come into life.
And at the end of life, when the physical embodiment dies,
the soul cluster detaches with the last breath,
when you release your last breath,
and it returns to its source in the upper world.
And so, everything that we have done and become,
including our ability to make choices and to create,
a function of the ego,
is incorporated into the oversoul,
which grows, increases, and becomes more, in response.
So, a question here at this point then.
On the path to, as you say in the Buddha's tradition,
what is called enlightenment,
where the three parts of the being are in harmony
and relationship to eachother,
were the three tenants that the Kahuna gave you,
about loving all that's in front of you,
with humility and so forth.
Would you say that these are, in essence,
pathways to that state of harmonizing?
Yes I would.
Yes I would, and
once you understand those three directives,
our path becomes very narrow.
Yeah.
Cause it's contrained by--
Very clear.
humility, by reverance, and by discipline.
And we function by offering aloha, love.
We live-- this is what Joseph Campbell meant,
when he said, "Follow your bliss, and you can't go wrong."
And we have to know,
we have to achieve self knowledge, self realization.
And when we achieve that, when we know who we are,
we experience authentic initiation.
Because the obstacles, in essence,
have been removed.
That's right.
Yes.
It's not so much about memorizing
sacred texts or scriptures.
It's more about the removal of obstacles.
Right.
This is the spiritual path at its best.
And for me, the world of the Shaman just opened this up.
Because the Shaman's world is about direct experience.
Direct experience of spirit.
You know, Ken Wilber has it-- you know,
many of your listeners and watchers, you know,
are aware of Ken Wilber,
as one of the greatest philosophical minds of our time.
Getting through his really thick books is a slug.
He said some-- he organized something in one of his books,
I'm not sure which one it was,
in which he outlined the various stages
of spiritual unfolding.
Had four stages.
Number one, spiritual unfolding begins with belief.
Now you can have mystical beliefs,
you could have mythic beliefs,
you could have religious beliefs,
you could have scientific beliefs,
rational beliefs.
Beliefs are great, as far as they go.
But not much in your life is gonna change
in response to them.
You know, you can believe
in the existence of spirits for 25 years,
and not much changes.
Your life just goes on as before.
So, in the end, beliefs begin to flag, right?
They begin to fail us.
This is when the second stage steps in.
Faith.
Faith soldiers on, when beliefs no longer compel us.
Have faith.
Now, faith can take you in two different directions.
In one direction, faith spirals you back into belief.
This is fundamentalism, and in my humble opinion,
it's a trap,
because it will not take you into what you're looking for.
When faith is doing its job, it takes you
in the other direction, into the third stage,
which is direct experience.
And when you've had direct experience of spirit,
It takes you immediately into the fourth and final stage,
which is personal transformation.
That's really the goal.
And it happens, moment by moment.
Right.
It's not some great, all-embracing
enlightenment Satori experience,
that you get sitting in the temple.
And it happens, decision by decision--
Happens washing the dishes.
Every encounter you have.
Changing the diapers.
Exactly, changing the diapers--
Sure.
And how you perceive it.
How you choose to perceive it.
And this transformation actually has physical manifestations
and this is the part I'd like to--
unless you want to continue on that path for a moment,
Let's go on.
I'd like to go to this--
I'd like to take the logical extension from here, which is,
some brave-- some brainwave work,
that you've had done on you,
and what the results were,
after all of these experiences and openings, unto yourself.
What happened with that?
Boy, this is where the scientist just sparkles.
In 1996, something very unusual dropped into my lap.
I got a large manila envelope.
And I looked at the return address, and it said,
"Department of Psychiatry,
"University of Illinois in Chicago"
Addressed to Dr. Hank Wesselman.
So I opened it up, and a bunch of reprints fall out--
One of them is in French--
and a cover letter.
And I look at the cover letter, it says,
"Dear Dr. Wesselman".
I look at the bottom, it says,
"Sincerely, Norman S. Dunn, PhD,
"Co-Director of the Brain Function Lab
"and Department of Psychiatry, blah, blah, blah".
So I go back up to the top, and he says,
"Dear Dr. Wesselman,
"I just read your book Spiritwalker,
"and you might be interested to know,
"that I think I have a very good handle
"on what you're experiencing."
Now, in that book, I had tried very hard to
describe my mystical experiences, as they happened.
Right.
He was able to read my descriptions, and he said to me,
"You might be interested to know,
"that back in the 50's,
"there was a French researcher named Uri Gastaut."
Uri Gastaut was the world's foremost investigative,
temporal lobe, epilepsy, at that time.
He was particularly interested in the
"samadhi" experience.
The samadhi experience, which is considered to be
the direct conscious connection with the Godhood.
Mmhmm.
Alright?
He knew that people who have epileptic seizures,
went down into theta brainwave patterns,
in which visionary experience often accompanied the seizure.
Mmhmm.
Now, in a nutshell,
delta waves fire when we're asleep.
They're at roughly, one to three cycles per second.
That's Hertz, one to three Hertz.
Theta waves are just above those,
at four to seven Hertz, four to seven cycles, per second,
where meditators go, zen masters go,
Yogis go there, psychic healers, trance mediums,
Shamans go there.
I mean, this has been measured.
Above theta waves are alpha waves,
which are kind of like a resting state.
You're awake and you're aware,
but you haven't had your first latte, okay?
So you're not particularly doing anything.
But then, they fire at roughly eight to 13 per second,
and above those, are the beta brainwaves states,
where we're focused, where we're conscious,
where we're doing things.
We're concentrating, you're working.
Roughly 13 to 20, 25 per second,
generating, roughly, eight to 10 to 15 microvolts
of amplitude in the brain.
This man went to India, looking for a guru,
who could achieve the samadhi ecstasy at will.
And he found one.
He found a guru in an ashram in India,
who was teaching Kundalini yoga, Kriya yoga.
And he ran some tests, using an EEG machine,
and an EMG machine, to measure muscle tension.
Now, the EEG machine, he hooked up all the guru students.
None of 'em could do it.
But the guru could.
And when the guru allowed himself to be measured
for his brainwaves,
he went into the samadhi ecstasy state,
and his brainwaves went way out beyond beta.
They didn't drop down into theta.
They went out to 30 and 40 Hertz.
That's way out there.
Mmhmm.
Generating between 30 and 40, 50 microvolts of amplitude.
He did it twice.
Now, nobody in the neuro-physiological community
had ever seen this before.
So Gastaut published it, in French,
in a peer-reviewed journal,
and that journal, that article, really stood unchallenged,
for more than 40 years.
Cause nobody knew what to do with it.
It became known as the Gamma rhythm.
I say that because we know more about it today.
Mmhmm.
But when Norman Dunn wrote to me, he said,
"This is what I think you're doing.
"I think you're going out into these
"40 Hertz brainwave states.
"I'd like to run some tests on your brain."
So I thought, "This is really, really great."
(Regina chuckles)
You know, I was hoping somebody in the scientific community
would, you know, pick up on this book.
To make a long story short, he came here to Sacramento.
He wired my brain for sound, so to speak.
And we ran tests on my brain.
He got all my brainwaves, in resting states,
and beta states and theta states.
No epileptic form patterns, nor any brain disease,
No tumors, nothing like that--
So your baseline.
He said, "Alright, I want you to see you
"access this state."
Now, I could do this for him,
because over 10 years of having these experiences,
my body soul retained the frequency of vibration,
for these deep trance states,
in which I go into this state where I become paralyzed,
(mumbles), I can do it now,
at any time, any place.
So I opened up that inner doorway,
which is how I think of it,
and allowed the power to flood into my body.
And I held it for about 15 seconds,
trying not to move, because you're not supposed to move,
with all these wires going off my head.
He's sitting behind me watching the computer.
He comes-- I come out of it, I close it down,
and I turn and I said, "Did you get anything?"
And he says to me,
"You can really do this, can't you?"
And I'm thinking to myself,
"Why would I say I could do this if I couldn't do this?
"Why would I waste his time, and mine?"
(laughs) Embarrass yourself.
I suppose there are a lot of people
who think they can do it.
Right.
Then he asked me a very male question.
He said, "Can you do it again?
(Regina laughs)
"Cause the guru could only do it twice."
So over the next hour,
I opened and closed that inner doorway,
a dozen more times,
giving him 13, a baker's dozen.
And in all 13 of these trials,
my brain was going out to 40 and 50 Hertz,
generating between 50 and 60 microvolts of amplitude.
Wow.
With maximum effect focused in the prefrontals,
and frontal lobes,
and the visual cortex in the back.
In other words, it wasn't in the temporal lobes at all.
Mmhmm.
Now, this, to me, was absolutely beautiful, because,
this was validation for everything that I had written about
in my book Spiritwalker.
And in fact, there's a chapter in my third volume,
Visionseeker--
the chapter is called
The Gateway to Transcendent Experience,
in which all of this brainwave work is recorded,
with references.
Mmhmm.
Scientific references.
Now, he came over to my house afterwards, for lunch.
And he looked at my wife, and he said to Jill, he said,
"You have a very unusual husband."
Of course my wife is looking at him as if to say,
"Tell me something else I don't know."
(Regina laughs)
Because she'd been there with me,
through all of this, you see.
Right.
He said, "No," he said, "when I was working in Brazil,
"on an NIH Grant"--
He was working on trance mediums, Shamans, psychic healers,
recording topographical brain maps.
He had brain maps on over 100 subjects, in altered states.
That's a big sample.
He said he'd only been able to find 13 other people,
who could achieve these 40 Hertz brainwaves states,
these Gamma rhythm states.
And here comes the kicker.
All 13 of them have had the alien abduction experience.
That's interesting.
Isn't this interesting?
Very much, yes.
They all claim that they couldn't do it,
until they'd had this experience.
Right.
And, like me, they could step into it, out of it, at will.
Like me, they claimed to talk to spirits, to see them,
to interact with them.
Some of them even claimed to speak directly with God.
Mmhmm.
Alright?
They were able to do various things,
like healing work, for others.
Mmhmm.
And of course, this all makes a lot of sense,
once you understand-- and this is known now--
that the physical structure of the brain--
and I'm talking about the cerebrum--
can change its structure in as little as 15 minutes,
in response to a powerful altered state of consciousness.
Hmmm.
This is how learning is laid down.
Right.
The physical structure of the brain
actually changes, and rewiring occurs,
and once that happens, you've got the program.
You've essentially been programmed.
So, is this something that has to happen
personally and organically?
Or is this a place people, then,
can take themselves or learn from books,
such as your series of books?
I'll tell you what I think.
I think that most of us
have a program on our inner hard drive.
Alright?
But like most programs on a hard drive,
you get a new computer.
You turn it on, you wanna set up your email or
your internet--
Right.
You know, the Safari, you know--
You need your programming manual.
Right, I mean, who knows what this computer can do?
Right.
You know, you don't really know,
and like most programs, it just sits there,
until you double-click it and bring it up.
Right.
See, for me, sexuality double-clicked my program.
The drum, the rattle, can double-click the program.
Hallucinogens, physical exhaustion,
dancing, singing, chanting.
All of these are ways of double-clicking the program.
This is a learned skill that improves with practice,
and this is what I do in my workshops.
You know, for those who are interested,
my website is sharedwisdom.com,
Mmhmm.
And, you know, our schedule is constantly changing,
from moment to moment, so--
And you're all over, you're--
I've seen your workshops--
It's a good way to check in.
Well, I do about 40 workshops a year.
Right, all over the world, truly.
All over the world.
Mmhmm.
And this is an international audience, well,
not only do you have your workshops going,
but you're still getting your fingernails dirty,
and you're on your way to Ethiopia,
and this is an incredibly exciting project.
Tell-- if you'd tell us a little bit about
what you're working on and the scope of it,
which is massive,
and how this interfaces with your other
internal, spiritual work.
Well, in my scientific work,
I mentioned at the beginning,
that I have been involved with this interesting crew,
for the last 30 years,
doing paleo-anthropological field work.
In 1994 and '95, I was in the field in Ethiopia,
in the middle of Awash Valley,
with an expedition which was headed
by Dr. Tim White of UC Berkeley,
and Dr. Berhane Asfaw of the Ethiopian National Museum.
And we uncovered the fossilized remains
of an early human which is so primitive,
that this may, in fact, be the famous "missing link,"
that Charles Darwin predicted we would eventually find.
We have, roughly, half of a skeleton,
which is a million and a half years older than Lucy,
for your listeners who know about Lucy.
It's been named in the Genus Ardipithecus,
and the species ramidus.
Ardipithecus ramidus,
and since '94, '95, we've actually got an earlier form of it
called Ardipithecus kadabba,
which is around 5.7, 5.8 million,
close to the six million year time mark.
Now the reason this is interesting is that
molecular biology
has shown that human beings and the african apes
are remarkably close.
We actually share 98.6%
of our DNA in common,
with chimpanzees,
which means that the relationship between us is very close.
It means, in molecular terms,
that there had to be a division,
between the ape lineage,
and the lineage which would evolve into humans,
somewhere, maybe, seven million,
maybe six million years ago,
and we seem to have found
the dividing point.
We seem to have found that first species
that is moving towards something which is going to
manifestly become human.
Now this, when it's published,
in 2006, 2007,
it's going to make the front cover of every newspaper
and every magazine in the world.
Because this is the earliest ancestor.
My job is to go to these sites where
major discoveries have been found,
and reconstruct the Paleo-environments,
of those sites at the time they were laid down.
So I go and I take all the sediments,
and pass them through very fine screens with water.
I literally wash the sands, and the clays, and the silts.
And this allows all the fine grain sediments
to go through the screens,
and it retains all the courser gravels,
which contain the bones of very small mammals,
like bats, shrews, rodents, small carnivores.
Mmhmm.
Now, these small mammals are very habitat specific.
Unlike elephants, that live lives of very long duration
in huge (mumbles) ranches,
you know, rodents only live to be two or three years old,
and they tend to be very habitat specific.
So you get specific kinds in forests,
specific kinds in patchy environments,
specific kinds in places where it's moist,
places where it's dry, in savannahs,
in arid zones, in deserts, and so forth.
If I can find them, I can tell a great deal about
the environment at the time it was laid down.
So, I went out into the desert, in '94, '95, '96,
with the expedition,
and I was fantastically successful.
Now, we would never say that we used magic to do this.
But, you know, the fact is, that, we--
I was able to recover almost 2,000 fossil specimens,
in a very short period of time,
(Regina chuckles)
representing about 40 different species of small mammals,
in all sorts of different families,
and all sorts of different groups.
I mean, bats, shrews, rodents and so forth.
So I'm in the last stages of my analysis now,
of this fossilized material.
This fossil fauna, really.
And it will probably result in a monograph that will
end up in describing about,
maybe 20 new species of fossil mammals.
Hmmm.
And, so I'm off to Ethiopia for a month,
to use a digital camera,
and a big binocular microscope combination,
to photograph all of these small fossils,
so that eventually we will get them all on the internet.
It's part of a large complex called RHOI.
The RHOI is the Research Hominids Origins Initiative,
and it's going to be a ma-- it's a major research--
international research project,
of which I'm a member of that team.
And so I'll be in Ethiopia for about a month,
doing research,
and then I'll be stopping in France,
at the University of Poitiers,
and the Naturalized Museum in Paris,
on my way home.
So is this more or less your day job?
Or do these two branch off? (laughs)
I know, that's an interesting question.
I mean, it sounds like some of your
unseen helpers are helping you,
assemble these specimens.
Well, you know, I'm very clear.
Mmhmm.
When I'm doing science, I'm doing science.
I'm very highly trained at the level of intellect, right?
Right.
That mental soul.
When I'm working in the world of the Shaman,
I'm using my body soul,
because that's where the doorway is.
And when that doorway opens,
I connect with my spiritual friends,
and invite them to come in to be of service to people.
Things happen.
You know, when the bridge is formed, miracles occur.
And over the years we've been doing this work,
we usually do healing rituals, as part of every workshop.
You know, I've watched people with
very serious life-threatening illnesses recover,
as a result of a single healing ritual.
I mean we're talking about recovery from things like cancer,
lupus, Crohn's Disease, Multiple Sclerosis.
Now, I'm not claiming to be able to work miracles.
Because I'm very clear on the fact that I'm
really not doing anything at all.
It's the others, who come in,
who seem to be able to come in and do this work,
on behalf of individuals who are healed.
But you, you use drumming and such, too.
We do.
So people are in a very open, expansive state,
which allows them to be, maybe a little bit more receptive?
We do.
In fact, we use the whole group.
Right.
Because, by the time you have 30 people,
in a focused altered state,
focusing their compassionate feelings,
for the individual who is suffering,
that individual's body soul picks up on this.
Mmhmm.
Because the body soul is the perceiver of what's seen,
and what is unseen.
And so the body soul will internalize all this
energetic assistance from all these people in the room,
including all the spirits in the room,
restore the matrix of that person's energy screen,
or pattern, what's--
Grid.
if you will.
Yeah.
Their energy grid.
And once the screen has been restored,
once the soul has been restored, essentially,
the body tends to recover.
So, you know, I've been drawn into the world
of the Shamanic healer.
And for the Shamanic healer,
they have a very interesting perspective
on how healing actually works.
They understand that, all illness usually finds its source
in three primary causes.
Disharmony,
fear,
and soul loss.
Soul loss is the most dangerous of these.
Soul loss is a state that we experience,
when we've had a serious trauma,
Okay, when we have lost a loved one.
When we've been in a serious car accident,
had a serious surgery.
When we've been molested--
Right.
or raped.
Or when we've been in combat.
Right.
Right?
Very often parts of the self disassociate and leave,
in response to the trauma.
Right.
The Shaman is the specialist,
in restoring that person's power,
extracting intrusive elements,
like negative thoughts and feelings,
and then restoring the person's soul--
the fabric of the person's soul--
through soul retrieval work.
This is the work my wife does.
Jill Kuykendall.
She's very good at it.
And once again, you know,
if people come to our website,
sharedwisdom.com,
Yeah.
They can look at her page,
and see what it is that she does.
Very good.
Well, I'm hoping this is only the first of many discussions.
Hey, me too.
Time permitting, because you're on fire,
both on the Shamanic path,
and you're going to be making the headlines
on your other work as well, it sounds like, in 2006 and '07,
so we're going to pester you and stay with you
wherever we can.
Well, thank you very much for the time. (claps hands)
Thank you.
When Hank is not out on a dig,
he spends much of his time on the road,
lecturing and teaching workshops.
So please take a look at our events calendar,
to see where he'll be appearing next.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(modern electronic keyboard music)